# Sentiment Scorer

This software aims at allowing researchers who aren't familiar with programming languages and environments, or aren't from techinical fields at all, to perform sentiment anaysis on textual data.

Sentiment Scores is designed to be user-friendly and accessible for non-technical people who need to assign sentiment scores to textual data. In this regard, the software has a simplified interface, with as fewer buttons and inputs as possible, labeled and documented, and a one-click approach for processing the data. The file format used is the CSV, which most researchers are familiar with, and allows for pre and post-processing using spreadsheet tools. The results are written in a selected destination folder, preserving the format and structure of the input, but adding a score column with the calculated values,

This project was created as a thecnical product in my thesis for the [PROFNIT](https://profnit.org.br/) master’s degree program. The original repository was archived, and can be accessed at (https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit). The published thesis can be accessed at: http://bd.centro.iff.edu.br/jspui/handle/123456789/4213

This tool uses the [VADER](https://github.com/cjhutto/vaderSentiment) methodology for scoring the sentiment in textual inputs. Thi method was chosen dued to its generally good results and low computational requirements.

## Features

 - Working with CSV data: The software works with data in CSV format, due to its practicality and popularity in scientific applications. The user can choose to either provide a single CSV file or several CSV ones for sentiment scoring.
 - Exporting in CSV format: The software exports the sentiment score data to a new CSV file, without modifying the source, containing the structure of the original file, with a new column added, with the calculated score. An auxiliary CSV file is also exported, containing one line for each input CSV and the average intensity of the texts in each of them, to facilitate obtaining averages for cases when the data is organized into multiple CSVs separated by time periods.
 - Selection of the column to be analyzed: The user can choose which column of the CSV will be analyzed so that the software will analyze only the text contained in the selected column, ignoring the others.
 - Filtering by keywords: The user can choose one or more keywords to filter the data. Only lines that contain at least one of the selected keywords will be analyzed. This functionality helps to analyze data with little or no pre-processing.

## Installing

If you use Windows or Linux operating systems in X64 architecture, executables have been created and can be downloaded and executed directly from the link below, without the need for specific technical knowledge:

https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit/releases/tag/v0.1-alpha

On the above page, you should download the file identified in the name with your platform. Along with the software, a zip file is provided containing some example files to facilitate testing.

If you use a different system, or the above procedure does not work, follow the instructions below:

Install Python on your machine, if it is not already available, from the instructions in the official website:
Python installation instructions page: https://www.python.org/about/gettingstarted/

Download or clone the software repository using the command:
git clone https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit

Enter the software directory:
cd tcc-profnit/produto

Install the necessary Python packages using the command
pip install -r requirements.txt

Run the software using the command below:
python analise_sentimento.py

##Usage

When starting the software, a screen like this will be displayed:

Main software screen displaying available options: https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit/blob/main/produto/imagens/tela%20principal.png?raw=true

The main screen consists of two directory selection fields, two fields for entering textual parameters, and buttons to start and cancel the process.

In the “Input” field, you must define the directory where the CSV files to be analyzed are located. It is important to note that all CSVs within this directory will be read and that they must contain standardized fields. It is recommended that this directory only contains the desired files for study.

In the “Output” field, you must define the path to save the CSV files generated by the software. It is recommended that it not be the same input directory to avoid these being read as input when running the procedure again.

The “Column name” field must be filled with the name of the column in the CSV file that contains textual data to be analyzed.

The “Keywords” field is optional and should be filled with desired keywords in cases where not all lines of CSV file should be analyzed. When using this feature, only lines containing at least one of inserted keywords will be considered and output file will only contain classified lines.

An example of filling in fields can be seen in figure below:

Image of main screen with data filled in: https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit/blob/main/produto/imagens/dados%20inseridos.png?raw=true

After filling in data, press “Start” button and wait for execution on a new screen. Depending on size of input files, process may take a long time. After completion, a dialog will be displayed indicating end of operation.

Results can be found in folder defined as output. Generated file is a copy of original file with a new column referring to calculated value as sentiment intensity. An example of generated files can be seen in images below:

Data output example: https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit/blob/main/produto/imagens/resultado.png?raw=true

Example of second output file with numbers of comments of each type and calculated averages for each input file: https://github.com/vitorsgoncalves/tcc-profnit/blob/main/produto/imagens/resultado2.png?raw=true

## Limitations

- The lexicon provided by VADER is based on the english language, and isn't suitable for analysing text in other languages.
- The method isn't free from errors, and the calculated score may not correspond adequately to the perceived sentiment in some cases.


## Future possibilities

- Adapt the methodolody for languages different from english.
- Allow the usage os logic operators for advanced keywork search.
- Offer different methods for sentiment analysis.
